+++
title = "Heat Pumps! Heat Pumps! Heat Pumps!"
date = 2024-06-23T23:03:03-06:00
draft = true
show_reading_time = true
summary = """
A short overview of heat pumps, and why they're the best way to heat,
or cool, your home's air and water. Also featuring horribly clever
things you can do when you start to think of heat as an entity to be
moved from where it is not wanted to where it is.
"""
+++

Heat Pumps are one of those delightful technologies that does pretty
much what it says on the tin. Through the magic of the [Carnot
cycle](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Carnot_cycle), heat pumps
transfer thermal energy (i.e. heat) from one location to
another. Everyone has encountered heat pumps in their daily lives:
your refrigerator is a one-way heat pump to transfer heat from the
inside (thus making it cold) to the rear (which anyone who has stuck
their hand behind their refrigerator will know can become quite
warm). Refrigerators pump heat to cool your food, warming your house a
bit in the process. Similarly, your traditional home air conditioner
is another one-way heat pump -- like a refrigerator it cools a house
by pumping heat from the inside to the outside (and ever so
inconsequentially warming the outside as a result).

In modern parlance, we tend to reserve the use of the term "heat pump"
for bidirectional systems -- capable of both heating and cooling
depending on which direction they are run. Modern home heat pumps are
a lot like traditional AC's, but with the capability to run in
reverse. As a result they can pump heat from inside of your house to
the outside (cooling your house), or you can run them backwards to
pump heat from outside your house to the inside (heating your house in
the process). We also use the term "heat pump" for systems that only
heat (for example, a heat pump water heater). Heat pumps that only
cool tend to continue to be called ACs (or refrigerators when they are
cooling your food rather than your house). But at the end of the day,
refrigerators, ACs, home heat pumps, and heat pump water heaters are
all examples of the same underlying heat pump principle. They consume
energy in order to move heat from one location to another.

# And I care, why?

So it turns out that if we want to have a planet that we can continue
to live on indefinitely, we really need to stop burning fossil
fuels. One of the main uses of fossil fuels today is in home
heating. In the Western United States this takes the form of the
ubiquitous gas furnace -- which burns natural gas in order to heat
your home in the winter. Even if we succeed in converting all
electrical generation to non-fossil fuel means, the use of fossil
fuels in home heating (and cooking, but that's another topic for
another day) will continue to contribute unsustainable greenhouse gas
emissions to our atmosphere.

If we can't keep heating our homes by burning fossil fuels, what are
the alternatives? If you live in certian places, you could perhaps tap
the Earth's geothermal energy. But this option is very expansive and
extremely limited it where it can be applied. We could go back to
burning trees (or other organic matter) for home heat, the way our
ancestors did, but that requires a lot of work and raises somewhat
significant air quality and fire safety concerns. We could design
homes to use passive solar heating, which is great, but again, is
limited in where you can apply it. Plus, it's hard to rotate all of
our homes to properly orient to the sun.

If we want a generally applicable, reasonably practical home heating
method that doesn't burn fossil fuels, we're going to need to use
electricity to heat our homes. There are two ways to do that. The
naive way is electrical resistance heating: basically running a lot of
electrical current through small wires causing them to heat up. This
is very simple and very expensive. While electrical resistant heaters
are technically 100% efficient (all of the electricty they consume is
being turned into heat), turning a high-quality energy source like
electricity directly into a low-quality energy source like heat is
rarely economically advantageous.

To demonstrate, look at the utility rate differences for electricity
(a high-quality form of energy) and natural gas (a low-quality form of
energy). At the moment, electricity in Boulder, CO costs residential
users somewhere in the range of $0.10 to $0.20 per kWh including taxes
and fees. Meanwhile, natural gas costs roughly $1/therm. 1 therm is
equivalent to 29 kWh, which means the price of gas is roughly $0.03
per kWh, or about one fifth the median electrical price of $0.15 per
kWh. So sure, we could use electrical resistance heating to heat our
homes, but we'd increase heating costs by roughly 5x.

!["Not great, Bob."](images/notgreatbob.webp)

Fortunately there's the less naive way to heat with electricity -- use
a heat pump. While electrical resistance heating technically turns
100% of the electricity expended into heat,heat pumps do us one better
-- they can provide more heat than the energy they consume. Rather
than being a blatant violation of the first law of thermodynamics,
this is really just a clever abuse of system boundaries (you can
ignore this sentence, it's a thermodynamics hack). Rather than convert
electricity to heat, heat pumps us electricity to move heat that
already exists around. As a result, it's not uncommon to find heat
pumps that provide "efficiencies" in the 200% to 400% range (e.g. that
move 2x to 4x as much heat as the energy they consume). That goes a
long ways to cutting into the cost advantage of natural gas, and puts
us in the range of being able to heat homes using electricity for
roughly the same cost as heating a home using fossil fuels (and in
places where expansive fuels like heating oil is used, heat pumps are
often quite a bit cheaper).

# Heat Pumps in Practice



* resiliency and risk
